KT Session Outline: Kubernetes and Its Architecture
1. Introduction to Kubernetes
What is Kubernetes?

Kubernetes (K8s) is an open-source container orchestration platform designed to automate the deployment, scaling, and management of containerized applications.

It was originally developed by Google and is now maintained by the Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF).

Why Kubernetes?

Simplifies container management.

Provides high availability, scalability, and self-healing capabilities.

Enables DevOps practices like CI/CD, rolling updates, and blue-green deployments.

2. Key Features of Kubernetes
Automated Scheduling: Automatically places containers based on resource requirements and constraints.

Self-Healing: Restarts failed containers, replaces and reschedules containers when nodes die.

Horizontal Scaling: Automatically scales applications up or down based on CPU usage or custom metrics.

Service Discovery and Load Balancing: Automatically assigns IPs and DNS names to containers and distributes traffic.

Storage Orchestration: Automatically mounts storage systems (local, cloud, etc.).

Rolling Updates and Rollbacks: Updates applications with zero downtime and allows rollbacks if something goes wrong.

3. Kubernetes Architecture
Kubernetes follows a master-worker architecture. The main components are:

A. Control Plane (Master Node)
kube-apiserver:

The front-end for the Kubernetes control plane.

Exposes the Kubernetes API for all operations.

etcd:

A distributed key-value store used to store all cluster data (e.g., configurations, states).

kube-scheduler:

Watches for newly created pods and assigns them to nodes based on resource availability.

kube-controller-manager:

Runs controller processes (e.g., Node Controller, Replication Controller) to regulate the state of the cluster.

cloud-controller-manager (optional):

Manages cloud-specific controllers (e.g., load balancers, storage).

B. Worker Nodes
kubelet:

An agent that runs on each node and ensures containers are running in a pod.

kube-proxy:

Maintains network rules to allow communication to and from pods.

Container Runtime:

Software that runs containers (e.g., Docker, containerd, CRI-O).

C. Add-ons
DNS (CoreDNS): Provides DNS services for the cluster.

Dashboard: Web-based UI for managing the cluster.

Ingress Controller: Manages external access to services.

CNI (Container Network Interface): Provides networking for pods (e.g., Calico, Flannel).

4. Kubernetes Objects
Pods:

The smallest deployable unit in Kubernetes.

Contains one or more containers that share storage and network.

Deployments:

Manages stateless applications.

Ensures a specified number of pod replicas are running.

Services:

Exposes pods to the network (ClusterIP, NodePort, LoadBalancer).

ConfigMaps and Secrets:

Store configuration data and sensitive information, respectively.

Persistent Volumes (PVs) and Persistent Volume Claims (PVCs):

Manage storage for stateful applications.

Namespaces:

Logical partitions for organizing resources in a cluster.

5. Kubernetes Workflow
Step 1: Define the desired state of your application using YAML/JSON manifests.

Step 2: Submit the manifest to the Kubernetes API server.

Step 3: The scheduler assigns pods to nodes.

Step 4: The kubelet on each node ensures the containers are running.

Step 5: Controllers continuously monitor and maintain the desired state.

6. Demo (Optional)
Deploy a Simple Application:

Create a Deployment YAML file.

Expose the application using a Service.

Show how to scale the application.

Basic Commands:

kubectl get pods

kubectl apply -f <file.yaml>

kubectl scale deployment <deployment-name> --replicas=3